---
path: '/oauth2-do-you-need-it/'

title: |
  Do you need OAuth2?

published: false
---

Hello developer! Let's break up the common misconception that complex OAuth2 and
OpenID Connect flows are required to implement a login system. We hope that this
article can save you a lot of time and effort trying to wrap your head around
HTTP redirects, relying parties, ID tokens, JSON Web Tokens, refresh token
synchronization, token introspection, back-channel logout, and all of these
other complicated topics related to OAuth2 and OpenID Connect.

Back in 2009 I was the one researching how to add login / user management / ...
to a website I was working on. I stumbled on stacks like the PHP Zend User
module or Drupal. But in the end decided to build this from scratch. Fast
forward to 2016, services like Auth0 are emerging and promises to finally make
login a solved issue were made and I thought to myself: "For this next project I
will use one of these"! Until, I didn't. Unfortunately, Auth0 was (and is)
unaffordable for projects that have millions of users. Everything was so
difficult to customize ("please, I just want to add this one extra field to the
registration screen"). And in the end, again, I wrote my own. This time, I
published my first big open source project, the open source
[OAuth2 Server Ory Hydra](https://github.com/ory/hydra) which quickly grew to
become the most popular project in this space. As I embarked on this journey, I
quickly realized that there is a fundamental, market-wide, misconception about
the OAuth2 and OpenID Connect family. Developers like myself wanted to add
"login" to their app, but tried to do so using OAuth2. But OAuth2 does not
define how account recovery works, or user registration, or email verification,
or - and this might surprise you - login. In the end, OAuth2 is a protocol that
was developed to solve the use case where you allow 3rd party app access to data
store at some service. For example like CircleCI is accessing your GitHub
repositories.

Yet OAuth2 is being marketed as solving login,
[but it is not](https://www.ory.sh/hydra/docs/concepts/before-oauth2/), "only
this can make your API secure". \*\*But it's a giant lie! So I embarked on this
journey to build the next system. This time, it should solve login,
registration, account recovery, email verification, profile changes, password
update, social sign in, multi-factor auth, passwordless, biometrics, native
mobile app APIs, dezentralized identity (still figuring this one out), and much
more! It should be so easy to use that it would be like PHP's `set_session` in
combination with being able to completely customize the user experience - adding
the fields I need and using the UI langauge and framework I love. In this guide
I will go into "adding login" to your (ReactJS) app, using our new open source
project [Ory Kratos](https://github.com/ory/kratos), and being able to do all of
the above!
